.Dd September 12, 2018
.Dt KEYCHAIN-PKCS11 8
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm keychain-pkcs11.dylib
.Nd PKCS#11 bridge library
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
library is used to provide a PKCS#11 API
for the SmartCard services provided by the Security Framework.  This
provides a way for programs that can use the PKCS#11 API to access
smartcards using the native support on OS X (High Sierra and newer).
.Sh OVERVIEW
By default
.Nm
will provide two virtual PKCS#11 slots.  The first slot will provide all
identities that are available from connected SmartCards.  The second slot
will provide an interface to certificates stored in the operating system
Keychain.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
The behavior of
.Nm
can be configured by a number of preference keys, configurable via
the
.Xr defaults 1
command.  All of these preference keys are under the domain
.Em mil.navy.nrl.cmf.pkcs11 .
All preference keys should either be configured as strings or arrays of
strings (using the
.Fl array
or
.Fl array-add
options to
.Xr defaults 1 ) .
.Bl -tag -width "keychainCertSlot"
.It Sy askPIN
Normally
.Nm
will signal to the calling application that the card PIN will be entered
out-of-band (not via the PKCS#11 API) by the use of the
.Em CKF_PROTECTED_AUTHENTICATION_PATH
flag and generate a PIN prompt using a UI dialog box.  If you wish to have
the application ask for the card PIN, the
.Sy askPIN
preference can be used to list applications that will be instead configured
to prompt for the card PIN internally.
.Pp
By default no applications will be configured to ask for a PIN via the
PKCS#11 API.
.It Sy keychainCertSlot
This contains a list of application names that will have a second
virtual token slot configured that contains certificates found in
system Keychains, along with appropriate Netscape Trust Objects.
This may impact performance depending on the number of certificates
stored in system Keychains, so you may only wish to use this for
certain applications.
.Pp
The certificates included in this slot will include all certificates
who's common name matches one of the strings found in the
.Sy certificateList
preference (see below), and all certificates issued by any of the matching
certificates.
.Pp
By default only the application
.Dq Em firefox
will have the Keychain certificates available. If you set this preference
key it will override the default, so you must also include
.Em firefox
in the list of applications if you want to have it enabled.
.It Sy certificateList
This contains a list of strings that will be used to match on the common
name of certificates in the system Keychains.  The matching is done
in a case-sensitive manner, but only a substring match is required.
Matching certificates will be included in the certificate slot (see above).
.Pp
All certificates issued by matching certificates are also included in
the certificate slot, so it is generally only necessary to specify root
CAs; all intermediate certificates should be automatically included.
.Pp
The default value for this preference is the string
.Dq Em "DoD Root CA" .
.El
.Pp
All application preference keys support the special values of
.Dq Em all
and
.Dq Em none
which will enable that feature for all and none applications, respectively.
.Sh DEBUGGING
.Nm
logs using the
.Em os_log
facility at the debug level, using the predicate
.Em mil.navy.nrl.cmf.pkcs11 .
These logs can be viewed using
.Em Console
or the
.Em log
command.  For example:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.Bd -unfilled
log stream --predicate 'subsystem = "mil.navy.nrl.cmf.pkcs11"' --level debug
.Ed
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sc_auth 8 ,
.Xr security 1 ,
.Xr defaults 1 ,
.Xr log 1 ,
.Xr SmartCardServices 7
