.Dd September 12, 2018
.Dt KEYCHAIN-PKCS11 8
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm keychain-pkcs11.dylib
.Nd PKCS#11 bridge library
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
library is used to provide a PKCS#11 API
for the SmartCard services provided by the Security Framework.  This
provides a way for programs that can use the PKCS#11 API to access
smartcards using the native support on OS X (High Sierra and newer).
.Sh OVERVIEW
By default
.Nm
will provide two virtual PKCS#11 slots.  The first slot will provide all
identities that are available from connected SmartCards.  The second slot
will provide an interface to certificates stored in the operating system
Keychain.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
By default
.Nm
will signal to the calling application that the card PIN will be prompted
out-of-band by the use of the
.Em CKF_PROTECTED_AUTHENTICATION_PATH
flag and generate a PIN prompt using a UI dialog box.  If you wish to have
the application ask for the card PIN, set the
.Em askPIN 
.Em defaults
option to a list of applications that you wish to have prompt for the PIN.
Example:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.Bd -unfilled
defaults write mil.navy.nrl.cmf.pkcs11 askPIN -array-add firefox
.Ed
.El
.Sh DEBUGGING
.Nm
logs using the
.Em os_log
facility at the debug level, using the predicate
.Em mil.navy.nrl.cmf.pkcs11 .
These logs can be viewed using
.Em Console
or the
.Em log
command.  For example:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.Bd -unfilled
log stream --predicate 'subsystem = "mil.navy.nrl.cmf.pkcs11"' --level debug
.Ed
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sc_auth 8 ,
.Xr security 1 ,
.Xr defaults 1 ,
.Xr log 1 ,
.Xr SmartCardServices 7
